example and documentation for Merkle-tree API (#628)
ingonyama-zk/icicle: docs/docs/icicle/primitives/merkle.md

// Construct the tree using the layer hashes and leaf-size
std::vector<Hash> hashes = {layer0_hasher, next_layer_hasher, next_layer_hasher, next_layer_hasher, next_layer_hasher};
auto merkle_tree = MerkleTree::create(hashes, leaf_size);

// compute the tree
merkle_tree.build(input.get(), max_input_size / sizeof(uint64_t), default_merkle_tree_config());
```

---

### Example B: Tree with Arity 4

This example uses **Blake2s** in the upper layer:

![Merkle Tree Diagram](./merkle_diagrams/diagram2.png)

```cpp
#include "icicle/merkle/merkle_tree.h"

const uint64_t leaf_size = 1024;
const uint32_t max_input_size = leaf_size * 16;
auto input = std::make_unique<uint64_t[]>(max_input_size / sizeof(uint64_t));

// note here we use Blake2S for the upper layer
auto layer0_hasher = Keccak256::create(leaf_size);
auto next_layer_hasher = Blake2s::create(4 * layer0_hasher.output_size());

std::vector<Hash> hashes = {layer0_hasher, next_layer_hasher};
auto merkle_tree = MerkleTree::create(hashes, leaf_size);

merkle_tree.build(input.get(), max_input_size / sizeof(uint64_t), default_merkle_tree_config());
```

:::note

> Any combination of hashes is valid including **Poseidon** that computes on field elements.

Reviewer: Are there any limitations on Poseidon in the tree (Odd bit width for example messing with the layer width)?

Author: I think that the field size must divide the output size of previous layer. But this is true for all other hashes too.
About converting random data to field elements it's the responsibility of the hasher function, not the tree.

:::

---

## Padding

:::note  

> This feature is not yet supported in **v3.1** and will be available in **v3.2**.  

Reviewer: It might be better to have the unimplemented part at the bottom of the document - avoiding the impression that the entirety below is currently not valid.

Author: I can mention that padding feature is not supported instead.
We could remove it but it's in the API so I think it's better to mention it.

:::

When the input for **layer 0** is smaller than expected, ICICLE can apply **padding** to align the data.

**Padding Schemes:**
1. **Zero padding:** Adds zeroes to the remaining space.
2. **Repeat last leaf:** The final leaf element is repeated to fill the remaining space.

```cpp
auto config = default_merkle_tree_config();
config.padding_policy = PaddingPolicy::ZeroPadding;
merkle_tree.build(input.get(), max_input_size / sizeof(uint64_t), config);
```

---

## Root as Commitment

```cpp
/**
 * @brief Returns a pair containing the pointer to the root (ON HOST) data and its size.
 * @return A pair of (root data pointer, root size).
 */
inline std::pair<const std::byte*, size_t> get_merkle_root() const;

auto [commitment, size] = merkle_tree.get_merkle_root();
```

:::note

> The commitment can be serialized to the proof.

Reviewer: How? Is it part of the proof config?

Author: As a user you get bytes+size so do whatever you want. It really depends on your proof format. ICICLE doesn't serialize for you.

# Merkle Tree API Documentation

## What is a Merkle Tree?

A **Merkle tree** is a cryptographic data structure that allows for **efficient verification of data integrity**. It consists of:
- **Leaf nodes**, each containing a piece of data.

> - **Internal nodes**, which store the **hashes of their child nodes**, leading up to the **root node** (the cryptographic commitment).

Reviewer 2: stores

Reviewer 3: "store" is correct here and shouldn't be plural

> - **Internal nodes**, which store the **hashes of their child nodes**, leading up to the **root node** (the cryptographic commitment).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Internal nodes**, which store the **hashes of their child nodes**, make up the layers leading to the **root node** which is the cryptographic commitment.
```

> ---

Author: ok

## Tree Structure and Configuration

### Structure Definition

With ICICLE, you have the **flexibility** to build various tree topologies based on your needs. A tree is defined by:

1. **Hasher per layer** ([Link to Hasher API](./hash.md)) with a **default input size**.

> 2. **Size of a leaf element** (in bytes): This defines the **granularity** of the data used for opening proofs.

Reviewer 3: What does "granularity" mean here?

Author: renamed unit-size. This is the size of a leaf element that is opened with a Merkle proof

The **root node** is assumed to be a single node. The **height of the tree** is determined by the **number of layers**.
Each layer's **arity** is calculated as:

$$

> {arity}_i = \frac{layers[i].inputSize}{layer[i-1].outputSize}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{arity}_i = \frac{layers[i].inputSize}{layers[i-1].outputSize}
```

$$

For **layer 0**:

$$
{arity}_0 = \frac{layers[0].inputSize}{leafSize}
$$

:::note
Each layer has a shrinking-factor defined by $\frac{layer.outputSize}{layer.inputSize}$.
This factor is used to compute the input size, assuming a single root node.
:::

---

### Defining a Merkle Tree

```cpp
// icicle/merkle/merkle_tree.h
static MerkleTree create(

>     const std::vector<Hash>& layer_hashes,

Reviewer 3: This should be the hasher used by each layer not the layer's hashes right?
```suggestion
    const std::vector<Hash>& layer_hashers,
```

Author: right

    uint64_t leaf_element_size,

>     uint64_t output_store_min_layer = 0);

Reviewer 2: missing explanation about output_store_min_layer

Author: fixed

```

---

### Building the Tree

The Merkle tree can be constructed from input data of any type, allowing flexibility in its usage. The size of the input must align with the tree structure defined by the hash layers and leaf size. If the input size does not match the expected size, padding may be applied.

> Refer to the Padding Section for more details on how mismatched input sizes are handled.

Reviewer 3: Link to the padding section

```cpp
// icicle/merkle/merkle_tree.h
inline eIcicleError build(
    const std::byte* leaves,
    uint64_t leaves_size,
    const MerkleTreeConfig& config);

template <typename T>
inline eIcicleError build(
    const T* leaves,
    uint64_t nof_leaves,
    const MerkleTreeConfig& config);
```

---

## Tree Examples

### Example A: Binary Tree

A binary tree with **5 layers**, using **Keccak-256**:

![Merkle Tree Diagram](./merkle_diagrams/diagram1.png)

```cpp
const uint64_t leaf_size = 1024;
// Allocate a dummy input. It can be any type as long as the total size matches.
const uint32_t max_input_size = leaf_size * 16;
auto input = std::make_unique<uint64_t[]>(max_input_size / sizeof(uint64_t));

// Define hashes
auto hash = Keccak256::create(leaf_size); // hash 1KB -> 32B
auto compress = Keccak256::create(2 * hasher.output_size()); // hash every 64B to 32B

// Construct the tree using the layer hashes and leaf-size
std::vector<Hash> hashes = {hasher, compress, compress, compress, compress};

> auto merkle_tree = MerkleTree::create(hashes, leaf_size);

Reviewer 3: Using "hashes" to mean multiple hashers is confusing. I keep reading it as the actual hashes (digest) of data.

Author: will make it hashers

// compute the tree
merkle_tree.build(input.get(), max_input_size / sizeof(uint64_t), default_merkle_tree_config());
```

---

### Example B: Tree with Arity 4

This example uses **Blake2s** in the upper layer:

![Merkle Tree Diagram](./merkle_diagrams/diagram2.png)

```cpp
#include "icicle/merkle/merkle_tree.h"

const uint64_t leaf_size = 1024;
const uint32_t max_input_size = leaf_size * 16;
auto input = std::make_unique<uint64_t[]>(max_input_size / sizeof(uint64_t));

// note here we use Blake2S for the upper layer
auto hash = Keccak256::create(leaf_size);
auto compress = Blake2s::create(4 * hash.output_size());

std::vector<Hash> hashes = {hash, compress, compress};
auto merkle_tree = MerkleTree::create(hashes, leaf_size);

merkle_tree.build(input.get(), max_input_size / sizeof(uint64_t), default_merkle_tree_config());
```

:::note
Any combination of hashes is valid including **Poseidon** that computes on field elements.
:::

---

## Padding

:::note

> Padding feature is not yet supported in **v3.1** and will be available in **v3.2**.

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't promise anything
```suggestion
Padding feature is not yet supported in **v3.1** and is planned for **v3.2**.
```

:::

When the input for **layer 0** is smaller than expected, ICICLE can apply **padding** to align the data.

**Padding Schemes:**
1. **Zero padding:** Adds zeroes to the remaining space.
2. **Repeat last leaf:** The final leaf element is repeated to fill the remaining space.

```cpp
auto config = default_merkle_tree_config();
config.padding_policy = PaddingPolicy::ZeroPadding;
merkle_tree.build(input.get(), max_input_size / sizeof(uint64_t), config);
```

---

## Root as Commitment

Retrieve the Merkle-root and serialize.

```cpp
/**
 * @brief Returns a pair containing the pointer to the root (ON HOST) data and its size.
 * @return A pair of (root data pointer, root size).
 */
inline std::pair<const std::byte*, size_t> get_merkle_root() const;

auto [commitment, size] = merkle_tree.get_merkle_root();
serialize_commitment_application_code(...);
```

:::note
The commitment can be serialized to the proof. This is not handled by ICICLE.

> :::

Reviewer 3: Maybe change to a warning?

Author: ok

---

## Generating Merkle Proofs

Merkle proofs are used to **prove the integrity of opened leaves** in a Merkle tree. A proof ensures that a specific leaf belongs to the committed data by enabling the verifier to reconstruct the **root hash (commitment)**.

A Merkle proof contains:

- **Leaf**: The data being verified.
- **Index** (leaf_idx): The position of the leaf in the original dataset.
- **Path**: A sequence of sibling hashes (tree nodes) needed to recompute the path from the leaf to the root.

![Merkle Pruned Phat Diagram](./merkle_diagrams/diagram1_path.png)

```cpp
// icicle/merkle/merkle_proof.h
class MerkleProof {
    // Represents the Merkle proof with leaf, root, and path data.
};
```

### Example: Generating a Proof

Generating a proof for leaf idx 3:

```cpp
MerkleProof proof{};
auto err = merkle_tree.get_merkle_proof(
    input.get(),
    max_input_size / sizeof(uint64_t),
    3 /*leaf-idx*/, true,
    default_merkle_tree_config(), proof);

auto [_leaf, _leaf_size, _leaf_idx] = proof.get_leaf();
auto [_path, _path_size] = proof.get_path();
```

:::note

> The Merkle-path can be serialized to the proof along the leaf. This is not handled by ICICLE.

Reviewer 3: Also consider changing this to a warning instead of a note
```suggestion
The Merkle-path can be serialized to the proof along with the leaf. This is not handled by ICICLE.
```
